Hello.
I just want to see how this picks up.
Hi there.
Okay.
We pronounce your name Chute, right?
Right.
I thought so, yeah.
It's not Chute, it's Chute.
We're talking with Carolyn Chute, and we're in Boston.
I'm going to just put this here.
I don't even think about it.
All right, it's just there.
Okay.
Well, congratulations on your new book.
Thank you.
And when the last book came out, which was a few years ago,
You were still kind of living in the same house.
Have you moved?
How's your life changed, I guess?
How would life start?
A few more gray hairs.
I have to wear my glasses now and have some back trouble.
And two more grandkids.
Oh, congratulations.
Do you have electricity?
I remember before you didn't even have electricity in the house.
You're all set.
We've always had electricity.
One of the stories I read was that... Yeah, don't believe anything you read in the newspaper.
No.
I don't know what happens.
Something happens between interviews and print.
I'm not sure what it is.
I think it kind of made for a good story for some of them to make you out to be... Instead of talking about the book, they would like to talk about, you know, I don't know.
Something that... I don't know what they did.
Don't worry about it.
Are you going to continue to write about Egypt?
How is this, do you think, is this a cycle that you pretty well destroyed now in these three books?
Well, if you mean you think it's the end of the world, yeah, probably it is, and I probably won't have another book.
It's probably the end of the world.
No, I mean, on this particular set in this area that you created Egypt, Maine.
Well, I mean, I did make up a town, because I didn't want to have people say, you know, such and such a street isn't
I don't want to be corrected.
I want to just have freedom.
Just like I make up characters and scenes, if you do that, you have total freedom.
And I guess that's the nice thing about creative writing is total freedom.
Other than that, I didn't really make up anything.
I mean, the situation was cultural and economic in this country, in my state, everywhere is real.
I watch it, and I write about what I see.
But so whatever books that you continue to write, you think you will still set in each of the names?
I guess, I mean, yeah, sure.
Oh, it's ticking.
I guess, you know, the scene at the end of the book, that future scene,
I guess I'm kind of worried.
As I work on the next book, you know how a book takes three, four, five years to work on.
I could see a lot of possible change in the way things are, particularly for anyone.
And for writers, I don't know.
Will there be a publishing of fiction in five or six years?
because it's being cut out so much.
Terrible.
Like Cork Smith, who's your editor?
It was one of six.
I mean, if you have to ask them for details, it was something like one of six, and they're doing mostly European fiction now.
You know, I think that foreign fiction is
And I just, and I heard, I knew of two others, Tickerman Fields was dropped, and McMillan dropped theirs.
Yeah, and a guy told me yesterday that he heard of one yesterday that was just a big publishing house that dropped their fiction.
I don't remember.
I don't remember what Tony said.
Wow.
They just dropped it, because fiction is, you know, they're trimming back.
It's terrible.
The investors want growth.
in every quarter.
I sit here by myself a lot in these hotels, and I listen to these guys talk on the phone, talking at dinner, you know, at the restaurants, and they go, yeah, we took the stocks out of that.
And when they're talking about their stocks, it's like there's nothing to do with the businesses themselves.
Is it something they believe in?
Is it something they'd like to see growth in?
Is it something to do with people they care about?
No, it's just this sort of rush.
It's like gambling.
It's like roulette or something.
I mean, they're just playing with numbers, right?
And our lives are at stake while they're doing this.
And to answer to them, businesses have to come back.
And let people go.
Let people go, cheapen their products, raise the prices.
And if, you know, the idea of calculus is that this rate, if you think about how fast inflation's going, the guys are being laid off, and this and this, I mean, wow, I mean, it's pretty creepy.
So I could see why this happened.
I mean, I've been frustrated with that.
I'm closer to the working people, and I've seen my whole state wiped out by companies.
If there isn't a union, it's a lot easier for them, but they just have a company come in, create a parent company, bleed all the assets out into a parent company through administrative fees, and then lay off older machines and so forth.
They lay them all off and reopen
to hire young guys part-time.
That's right.
No benefits.
Cheaper at the lower end of the scale.
So, you know, a guy like me, I'm 50.
Yeah, that's exactly what happened with you.
I left this newspaper.
I mean, I still write for them.
Freelance now.
I'm part-time.
That's what they want.
And they love it.
And they love you because you're a professional and you know what you're doing.
I've been doing it for 20 years, and now they're getting me for zilch.
Yeah, that's what they want.
See, the young guys,
I'm sure they really want the older guys because they know what they're doing, but they want to show them who's boss, and they want to say, you know, take the other guys, you're welcome to come back, too, but of course, like Farhana was, you've done before.
Yeah, and so eventually, I think that the papers, not the papers, I mean, the papers should do it, but the government's got to release these figures.
When we see unemployment and employment rates, I'd like to not just see them say,
I don't want to see that.
I want to see it separated.
I want to see full time with benefits list.
I want to see hard time with no benefits list.
I want to see small business and small funds.
I want to see it all separate, like at least four columns.
And you know how phony that figure is when they say the unemployment rate went down?
Benefits.
You see, I collected for a year.
So you counted as one that was unapplied.
Yeah, but when my benefits ran out, I don't count anymore.
That's baloney, you see, because there are so many people whose benefits run out, and let me tell you, it's hard.
It's hard to find work, but you don't count anything.
I don't know if they count you as, now you're... They don't count me, period.
You don't exist.
I don't exist.
Yeah.
This is very upsetting.
And I think, why aren't we all out there, like in Dr. Zhivago, with our picket sign, saying, whoa, we want something.
We want to figure out what's going wrong.
We want to get it straightened up.
We don't want you to hear about new jobs.
Jobs is not a good word.
We don't want to hear about that.
We want more.
And if people aren't excited enough, it's sort of like the water has come to a boil too slowly.
And then, I mean, are they afraid of tanks and helicopters?
I mean, what are we afraid of?
I mean, we all ought to at least be a little upset.
Do you get angry when you're right?
Yeah, especially when the helicopters were flying over my house while I was working.
Helicopters were flying over my house looking for marijuana.
In fact, they don't even have to find marijuana.
Someone just reports that they thought you had marijuana and were selling it
as far back as the 70s, they could take your house.
They could take your house.
And in Maine, that's been one of the things, is to take people's houses, get the kids away, because the state of Maine, when they're so poor, that's one thing, but this program, you know, when you take something away from people that they want badly and they're going to do it anyway, gambling, drinking, drugs, prostitution, these kind of things, they're going to do it anyway.
It's just that they're going to create this huge underworld, this huge
And this is what they've done.
And the bureaucracy has to feed itself.
So what are they going to do to get money into this drug program is to collect houses and have it go back into it.
What do they do with the houses when they take them?
They sell them.
They sell them cheap so that they can get money.
And I've got tons of articles on this, and I'm following very closely with some people.
One guy and his wife, she's an attorney who's been following the cases very closely in Maine and the country.
Whenever I've got a question about it, I write them, and they tell me who it's been serious.
When I say you get angry, though, I mean just angry with the system when you're writing, and does this influence the text?
Yeah.
Well, like I said, the helicopters are over here, and you know that they are out there doing some very unjust, unfair, terrible, I mean, something that feels like our Constitution is like a
Confederate dollar bill now.
I mean, it's like our people are under such, we're just a joke to the government who's being lobbied by these businesses and all that.
And I feel that, you know, as they're flying over me, I mean, while I'm writing, and all these things are happening, every time I pick up on this paper, where all this stuff happens, it goes inside you.
When your characters come out, they're, and you see around you the way they're living their life, is being affected by this stuff.
It's not even like a planet.
It's not like an idea that I have.
It's exactly what you say.
It's anger.
It's strong feelings that I have.
That's where my characters come from, is my feelings, not from ideas at all.
But how do you translate that into the creation of a character?
It's a very nicely, fully rounded character.
I am trying to get to the book, too.
Yeah, it's sort of like the book is writing.
Fiction is like juggling.
You juggle all these things at one time.
It is, like I said, it's not so much ideas, it is emotions.
Matt read ones where you actually kind of get yourself into a trance.
Yeah, I've talked to other fiction writers, too, and people who really write fiction, you know, not, well, literature, I guess, I mean, you know, not genres.
I've been writing about writers for 20 years.
Yeah, ask them about this trance thing, because once I started asking other people, they go, well, yeah, as a matter of fact, it's sort of something, one of them said,
She said to me, Jose, I haven't admitted it to too many people because it sounded too strange.
She said, but I heard, um, God, Gardner, John, Gardner, does his name, John?
Something Gardner.
It wasn't John Gardner, he died.
Was he in Florida?
He used to teach, he died, yeah.
He died in a motorcycle or something.
Oh, really?
John Gardner, he used to, and he wrote books about fiction.
Yeah, he taught, yeah.
He did, right.
He said, she said, he's the only other person I heard.
So we started asking different ones.
Tell me, describe it.
I mean, do you actually use... Well, you have to make the whole world disappear in order for the characters to come alive.
Otherwise, they'd be too frail.
They wouldn't even be able to get a grasp on them.
So, to make the whole world disappear.
I guess what... You mean the real world?
Because it's very vigorous.
The real world is very vigorous.
Real people are very vigorous.
You can't have any interruption.
It's not like a trance, like you'd go to sleep, obviously, and you wouldn't be writing.
It's more like, I'd say, the most painful, actually, the most muscular kind of concentration.
This is one of the reasons why you kind of put it off in the beginning, when you start a work, is because it is such a strain to concentrate that hard.
Maybe more than a trance, it is a kind of concentration with no other kind of concentration.
But maybe it's a trance.
Do you outline?
And I read also where you perhaps distill one page from a hundred pages.
Yeah, kind of.
Well, I outline, but then, you know, change it.
Keep changing as it goes along, because it doesn't look like we're really going there.
And of course, the characters have to lead the way.
You can't make them do each one.
So I can't do any outlines.
Just constant outlines, but something so I can feel.
I'm like, I'm not really lost.
I don't want to feel too lost.
You mentioned that final scene at the end.
Did you know as you were writing that you were heading for this?
For this future, the future scene.
I was thinking more of where he dreams of the future.
I guess because I have had this dream of the future myself, and that was one of the things that had led me into the work, or that I did have this dream of the future.
Tell me a little bit about that.
I've had a few dreams about the future.
I have one dream where, you know, most of the, well, I do dream in colors and people, you know, friends and family or whatever.
People, I don't know what it is about my dreams where there's always like a hundred people and they're all running around and stuff.
But nowadays, these little black and white dreams are very disturbing to me.
They're kind of like TV.
And I see my white eyes and I just can't.
This particular one was that we were all being loaded into trucks, and it was, I don't know if it was cooler weather, because we were all wearing heavy coats and so forth, and it was black and white.
And we were all, it was a grave situation, a very grave situation.
We got on the trucks, and over the top was this, like, sign as the truck ran to pull away.
It said, Tuoto.
And I always said to my husband, this was like 10 years ago, I said, well, if it comes through, we will...
probably riding up Route 202.
And because there's a Route 202 there, the house we lived in.
And then I said to Michael Haldegas, you know, I don't know, maybe it's the year 2002.
I'm going to get really scared because some of these other dreams I've had like that came absolutely true.
It's a dream.
I was at Vermont College.
I didn't know I was at Vermont College.
It was a dream just like that.
I dreamed I was sitting in this room, and it was before my book was published.
I had no idea this would ever happen.
It was a dream.
I was sitting in a chair, and there was a big window, and I could see people walking across the snow, dozens of them, and they came around to a door and came into the door and gave me gifts.
They were all bringing me gifts.
And I said, Michael, that was a nice one.
I was happy.
About a year and a half, two years later, I was sitting in this chair of Mark College, and I could look out across the courtyard, and the people came around, they came down the hallway, came to the door, and one of them brought me a clock, one of them brought me a little scarf, one of them brought me a little package of poems she'd written.
And it was just like that to me.
I said, look, I said, well, the only one that hasn't, and there were some others, too, but the only one that hadn't come through yet was the two or two ones.
And so, I mean, this sounds all silly and everything.
I don't usually tell to many people, but this disturbed me so much that
It disturbed you?
This other one about the 202 thing, that every time I'd set to work, it would keep resurfacing with the other stuff that I was working on.
So I began to see that I was working towards this in the work as well.
Not intentionally, but it just kept kind of coming out.
It was a concern.
Do you plan on doing a book this year?
No.
No way.
I want to go small.
Because the first two books were tight.
They were a lot tighter.
And I'm not complaining.
But it really is a rich tapestry here.
Well, financially, for publishers, they probably like it a lot better if it's smaller, because you see it's the same price as a smaller one.
So I really would try for small.
But what happened was I know when I did beans, I was not confident.
I was not sure myself about how well I could hold a reader's attention.
So I didn't allow myself to cut loose with character development.
And then by the second time I let go a little more and I worked at material.
I had a better idea what bad was anyway.
I knew the first one was bad.
I didn't want to do it like that.
What do you mean the first one?
The first one was wonderful.
Not well written.
It was awful.
But the second one, I felt the second one was better written.
But this time...
You know, like a photographer puts the paper and the film, different, whatever, that paper, I guess I'm thinking, into the sensitized paper.
The tree.
Yeah, into the tree, into the chemicals, and slowly, you know, kind of, that's the way the novels do.
But this one seemed to be... You mean this new one?
Yeah, it seemed to be like, instead of a...
you know, a 5 by 7, it seemed to be getting to be an 11 by 14.
And I kept thinking, well, something's wrong here.
I mean, it seemed to be too much stuff.
There were too many people, there was too much stuff.
I don't know what's going on.
I thought what was happening was that I, because I pictured a smaller book, I thought that I was out of focus somehow, and that it wasn't, I didn't know where I was going.
But then it began to get clearer and clearer, thicker.
It was tied together better so I could see that it was just a bigger bore.
Did you work at all with your editor while this was going well?
No.
Or did he just want to see the work when it was done?
Yeah, I don't like to shoot.
I don't like him to see it until it's done.
At this time, he did see a little piece at the end before it was done, and I told him I didn't want to do it.
You wanted to see it.
Yeah, I'm a year and a half of a deadline, and I was a little worried about that.
But I don't really...
I like to have the time where I need to get it presentable.
You know, it's like going outside with no clothes on.
To the public, I mean, you kind of want to get dressed first.
And that was the way it felt, you know, about the work.
I want it to be presentable.
I don't like... I think, too, if you're at a procedure work in progress, when they do see it finished finally, they're still going to remember it once more.
Like you remember your kid as a baby.
They never can be anything but a baby together.
They're always a baby.
You always expect them to do baby things.
I think that's why kids hate their parents.
It's like telling the jury to forget something they just heard.
Yeah.
Yes.
Exactly.
Forget your sort of compassion.
Yeah.
The jury will disregard what they just heard.
Exactly.
Yes, you're right.
It's ridiculous.
Now, when Corksmith finally, because I'd like to get his name in the following, because I understand he's a wonderful, and you pay a nice tribute to him.
What did he bring to the book, Pennsylvania?
Okay.
When I had my first book written, like I said, I don't feel as... I mean, it wasn't worse.
I mean, horrible.
It wasn't a horrible book.
I think it showed a person who might be able to write a book later.
But it wasn't.
But he's the kind of editor who doesn't say, rewrite, rewrite.
All he does is he says, he's not a writer.
He's a reader.
He's always loved books.
And he says, I am your first reader.
And what he does is he sits with you and he has all these questions he asks me.
He says,
Did you really mean this?
What did you mean by that?
Is this your intent?
And so it caused you to really think about your work.
And so he really, by not jumping on me and forcing himself into the work, I feel allowed me to take so much risk the next time and then the next time.
So much risk to really push, to really feel confidence about myself because I felt like I was in charge.
I didn't have to worry what he was going to do.
I mean, I did worry that he and people would like it, but I didn't worry that he was going to come in there and grab it and do something.
Well, that's the first book you did with him, is this right?
All the three, yeah.
Oh, well, no, he was with Tickering Fields, and then he went to Harcourt, right?
Yeah, so I went with him there.
Oh, so you went with him.
Yeah.
Now, where's he going now, I wonder?
Well, being a professional, professional,
You know what I mean?
They want the young ones, I think.
I mean, this is what I perceive.
And I'm not blaming any one company.
I think it's the system, the way that the investors are.
I've got a book out there right now.
I know the situation.
They're cutting back, and it's a good book about books, and everybody who looks at this is wonderful, but they're looking for the bucks.
What's it going to do?
Who's going to buy it?
So believe me, I... And can it be made cheap, and can they pay you cheap?
You know, they want to pay you as little as possible.
This is the story of my life.
Yeah, we're in it together.
We're all in it together, right?
The Robin Hood theme.
You know, you started with this dream that you had.
Yeah.
When did this theme of the Robert Tremblay work in?
I guess the people, when they see and feel this stuff coming on, when our lives are affected this way, many of us do want to fight back.
Many of us want to do something to change it.
And I guess what it felt like as I began to have these heroes, I had a couple of people in there who were the type who would take on, was to show that in the 1990s,
You can't.
I mean, you know, he couldn't do anything, and he was real shy anyway, but then the other one, Annika, couldn't do anything.
I mean, you can't fight it.
You know, even when you get a few people together, you can't.
So this is not only anger, but it's frustration.
Is it defeat?
Does it approach your sense of defeat?
I think, as human beings, we don't, or we just start breathing now.
So we're never totally defeated.
We fight to the end.
And I find that I've made a new friend, and her name is Helen Pergian, and she has written a book called Fed Man, New York, and she's going around the country trying to stop the death penalty in the United States.
And she's so hopeful.
I'm not.
You know, I say to her, I think that they'll, you know, two years ago, they introduced 50 new ways for the death penalty and tried to get it so that it would be required in every state.
And I said, you know, I noticed that it was, one of them was if you had an illegal drug and a firearm on you at the same time.
If you had a hunting rifle and a marijuana, whatever, you would be given the chance.
And I wrote my senator about it, and it was true.
It wasn't like it was a misprint in the paper.
And when I mentioned to her, she goes, yeah, what about the one working, doing some kind of a thing in the poultry business?
I said, well, maybe that was what they call, what is that word?
When they add stupid things to it to try to get it to fail or whatever, that could have been it.
But I feel that they, boy, there's a lot of people in the United States they'd like to get rid of, and of course the poor, and if they can make the chair or whatever, you know.
Easy to use.
Easy to use, and if they make a lot of laws to get rid of this drug group that they're disproven of and all this stuff, people in the streets with the guns and the, you know, there's a whole bunch of them that are a real problem right now.
I'm worried.
No, she says, I think we can stop it because people are basically good.
Yeah, she's a nun.
People are basically good.
And I keep thinking, boy, I think what it is is when someone fights as hard as she does, she's got to have a vision of hope.
She's got to do it.
Why bother?
So I think there's so many people who don't feel defeated.
They keep going.
And I've suggested, why don't we get it so that Thomas Jefferson said that the small landowner is the most
important part of a nation that we, you know, it's very important to keep people feeding themselves, taking care of themselves, being part of a little community.
That kind of poor is one thing.
Living homeless, landless in the streets with no skills to take care of yourself, guns and drugs and all that stuff, is a survival skill.
I mean, human beings are beautiful animals.
I mean, they're going to figure out something.
And that's it.
That's how they figure to keep
alive.
And so it's like, well, if you give them this, you know, and then every time I say this, someone goes, well, I lived on a farm and I left.
I go, yeah, and you were going to death now.
You're happy.
This is what you wanted.
What about all these, for instance, say, in New England and out around who still want their farms?
No one's hoping to keep them.
And all these people who are in revolt right now.
So I'm thinking, you know,
You know, it's like education, that's the thing that gives me hope is if we could have education, say, you know, 100% of the people, children, are forced to go to school.
Because they have that.
They still drop off.
They still don't call them.
Right.
There are laws that say every kid has to go to school.
To learn the desk.
Yeah.
Right.
And to learn white, and to aspire to the white shirt.
Obviously, the ones that are dropping out are saying, I wasn't meant to be a white.
I mean, why would anybody think that 100% of the people are meant to be great at the desk, to be a lawyer, a doctor, or a business person?
What's ever made us think that 100% of the people is anyone?
Sure.
Well, I went to school up there, and I went to Bates in 1965, or a few years ago.
But I remember even then, the concern was, were these kids getting educated about main kids going to college, and they do well?
I remember they were so fearful that, well, fine, they're getting trained, and they're getting educated, and they're acquiring skills.
Now they're going to leave the state of Maine.
Yeah, and then break the family up.
Yeah, but it didn't just break the family up, but you're getting these highly skilled people, and now they're going off to the big city.
They're going off to Katy Perry, you know?
Yeah, it's terrible.
It is terrible in a sense.
I mean, if that's their choice, fine.
But what about this, you know, if you take 100% of the kids?
I mean, I'm very close to people who don't read and write.
They're not meant to read and write.
The words shift around.
I mean, they were meant to farm, to fish, to hunt.
And they are told that, well, we're going to do special ed, and they just will not give up on it.
I guess this is thousands of years we could farm, fish, and hunt.
We could survive as people.
Now, in like a couple of generations, nobody knows.
Nobody knows.
Almost nobody knows how to do this.
If this big mother
this big corporate mother of ours, which we're all sucking off of, dies or abandons us, which it is doing slowly, pulling out, we're going to be able to survive.
We're all going to be in the streets with the guns and the trucks.
I mean, like I say, all right, guys, this is an unpleasant thought to a lot of you that maybe we should try seeing to it that some people might not be made for the desk.
They don't want to give up on that idea.
But what is going to happen if we keep going the way we're going now?
We're going to have these messes.
masses of people that are displaced, or masses of people that are dependent on this big system in some way, like the high-tech stuff, and all this stuff, and working at Walmart's, and all this stuff.
Masses of people that can't eat.
When that pulls out, how are we going to feed ourselves?
This is the book.
I mean, this is what I would... I did feel very urgent about getting this book out.
I was a year and a half past that line.
That wasn't just it.
I did feel I really wanted to talk to people about this.
And now maybe part of the urgency was somewhere in there.
I knew that we were going to lose our publisher.
If I hadn't gotten it done then, another week, another month, it would have been over.
No, it wasn't that.
It was this stuff I see.
It's a big picture.
Clinton and these guys, they go, jobs, we need jobs.
Yeah, more McDonald's jobs, more time, no benefits.
Jobs is not how it works.
Yeah, yeah.
We need more small business.
We need more, not less.
We need to simplify the burdens that are on small business.
We need to let up.
And then they always go, if you let a farmer sell milk, it'll get us all sick.
All right, if we don't do something now, we're going to be worse than sick.
Why do they always have the milk?
They always jump on the milk.
Right now, in our state, the law bank has just said, well, we can't afford, all right, the governor was on the TV the other night talking grip service about the small farm in his home.
At the very same time, the state dumped eight potato inspectors.
The potato inspectors have to inspect the potatoes before they can be back.
The little farmers sometimes have to wait for days to get a potato inspect.
The big potato, the big farms, big giant agribusinesses get an office where the potato inspects the babies.
So is that giving small businesses a break?
I think they should be seen first and let them let them know.
What's the reaction to you now in Maine?
I mean, it was kind of mixed there in the beginning.
I mean, the people in Maine.
I mean, there were some people in some areas who said, you know,
Yeah, George Mitchell didn't want me to tell him.
Is that right?
He said, what do they think of us?
He wanted everybody to think that we were all like him and George Bush.
And the yellow-ringed coat guy with a little smile on the pipe.
But besides him, there were a lot of people who were very close to having any income, at the time, having no income.
who kind of, I think they were afraid that people would say well like that, because they were so close, you know what I mean?
Because there were a lot of kind of richish people and middle-class professional people who would come to my readings, but it didn't worry them any, but it was the ones who were very close.